---
layout: post
title: "teenage girlhood: the uncrackable code"
---

Belonging is often an illusion created by external perspectives. Understanding inherent social codes can be important to "fit in" with a certain group, but that doesn't mean one belongs in that group. For many, there is always peer pressure and a strong need for self-identity that causes them to forcefully conform to social codes. This artificial conforming that is driven by social constructs often does the exact opposite of providing people with the feeling of belonging, rather, it can cause people to easily feel out of place and even imposter syndrome. Sometimes, even the smallest differences between themselves and others can create feelings of anxiety and discontent as they strive to achieve what they define as a tangible (though always changing) idea of "normal". Although unspoken rules can be used to group people into social clusters, they often group people incorrectly as the rules do not define the individuals themselves and thus have no correlation to their true belonging to said cluster.

Countless people have forced themselves to align with certain codes in high school to "fit in" or to be in a specific clique -- especially girls. High school girls often feel the constant need to conform, to wear a certain brand of clothes or even act a certain way, in order to "fit in". The so-called "tacit codes" in this case are toxic and repressive, and the influx of social media has only worsened both the volatility and strictness of such rules.  Social media creates more and more trends on a weekly, or even daily, basis (hence the term "microtrends"), creating an even higher pressure to follow such trends in order to appear "cool". As almost every person who utilizes social media aims to put the shiniest, prettiest version of themselves out on the Internet, it creates unrealistic beauty standards that are often impossible to meet, costing many their health (both physical and mental) as they strive to achieve it. Eating disorders are especially common in teenage girls for this very reason. Alcohol consumption and drug use (especially in the forms of marijuana or nicotine) are other dangerous activities that are glorified by social media and pushed towards young girls at an early age, as they are advertised as fun, new, and cool. Instead of creating a sense of belonging among those who do follow such trends and aim to physically appear the same way, it can create overwhelming peer pressure as soon as someone either refuses to conform or is simply burnt out from it. This kind of extreme conformity can be isolating, and is, by definition, unnatural. It is only too easy to classify people by their social cliques, especially in high school, without seeing the nuances beneath the surface that reveal the true nature of a desperate need to belong. 

The idea of normalcy is another that is constantly strived for, and by people of all ages as well. Those that lack security in themselves, or are looking for something to give them a sense of identity, look to normalcy. The need to appear "normal" drives many to want to eradicate anything that they find different between themselves and others. Sometimes, wanting to belong to a certain group may be positive, as long as one does not force themselves into it, as it creates a group identity and may foster friendships -- however, the ﻿need﻿  to belong is out of one's control. If belonging to a specific group is a necessity, it only displays a lack of self-confidence and need for outside affirmation that one is "normal". Normalcy can have a toxic nature when viewed as something concrete, something that can be defined by a certain appearance or nature in a person, as it then becomes a certain mold that people force themselves to fit. Appearing different is a common fear for many people, and oftentimes, when one sees differences between themselves and others, they only aim to eradicate those differences. However, different is not always bad. Those that stand out, that are by definition "different", are often the ones that bring about the most social change and progress. 

True belonging is only achieved when individuals themselves, in their original state, are able to share values and experiences together, without the binding of ambiguous social rules.
