---
layout: post
title: "The Man in the Elder Tree"
---
A horribly maimed face was molded in the twisted limbs of the old elder tree. His thin lips stretched painfully to his mangled cheeks in a dryly sinister smile so purely evil it would send chills down the spines of the bravest of heroes. The man writhed in the tree, caged.

With a burst of white light, the tree splintered into a million shards--and suddenly, silence. The purest silence any creature had heard, for even while the forest was quiet, the soft rustle of leaves or the breathing of a bird would always be present, underlying. But not a single sound dared to trespass the commanding reign of silence. A dark mist swirled in the air, and solidified into a dark, ugly wrinkled creature with batlike wings deeply veined in crimson, with the face of a middle aged man-which might have been handsome if the hands of time were rolled back a decade or so--but it was bruised and scarred to the point where it seemed vaguely humanoid, much less handsome. The right corner of his lip was stretched upward to meet his nose, and the left side of his face was altogether too badly stitched and deformed to tell what injuries were present. The forehead was covered in fresh scars, raw and pink. Inlaid beneath the damaged forehead were two angled slits, bearing inky pupils and an iris streaked in a violent shade of crimson. Ugly seemed too mild a word to describe him. 

But he was free. Uncaged. Free. He beat his wings hard and rose up into the clouded gray sky, letting out an animalistic screech from his cracked lips. By far, they were the strangest part of the creature. The claws were curved inward like little scooping shovels, and twenty-three blunt teeth rimmed the edge of each claw. He crashed through the lush green, swinging and destroying the tall pines like toothpicks. Animals of every kind were now shelterless. The creature tucked its black-brushed wings and shot downward in a muddy blur. Slitted eyes found prey, and claws extended for the kill. He chose a lumbering white rhino, and tossed him carelessly into the air. But the creature made no move to eat its prey, or even pick it up. Instead, he dove in for more. 

The most impressive beasts to ever grace the previously fertile planet were flung lifelessly from the destroyed forest like limp ragdolls; insignificant and weak. Some tried to flee. Some tried to fight. None escaped his strange curved claws. The creature attacked in cold blood until not a single soul was left. He soared above the body-littered forest and landed on the center tree. The creature roared, which echoed from valley to mountain to river, claiming this forest as his. It had been too quick. Too effortless. And more would come.
