---
layout: post
title: "Replacing One Oppressive Government With Another: The Islamic Republic’s Abuse of Powers and Lack of Adherence to Ayatollah Khomeini’s Vision"
---
The Islamic Republic was established after the Iranian Revolution of 1979 due to the Iranian people’s dissatisfaction with the shah. Much of the dissent around the shah’s regime stemmed from his elitist policies that completely neglected the needs of the majority of Iranians. The shah had a great amount of Western (especially American) support for his regime, and many of his policies served to westernize Iran’s society, which was resented by many Iranians. Some also thought that the shah was also not giving Islam an important enough role in his government, leading to the eventual overthrow of it and the establishment of the Islamic Republic, which was based around nationalist ideals of “neither East nor West”, and promised to improve the lives of a majority of Iranians instead of just the upper classes. Khomeini, the leader of the new government, stated in his philosophy that “We are for an Islamic system, that is to say a democratic regime founded on popular consensus and Islamic law. Western democracy is incomplete. Our democracy will resemble it but be perfected. ...[A]ll citizens of such an Islamic democracy, from the leaders to those at the bottom of the social ladder, are equals before the law...It is not a sham democracy or a dictatorship in practice, as are some other governments.” Although the Islamic Republic has succeeded in addressing Khomeini’s original vision by improving general living conditions for the impoverished majority of Iranians, it still has many shortcomings and contradictions, such as the use of unnecessary violence and brutality against prisoners (sometimes convicted for simply having non-mainstream ideals) despite Khomeini’s vow that the people would have freedom of expression to some degree.

One of the Islamic Republic’s greatest successes was its change in policies. The new government started using pro-rural policies instead of the pro-elite ones favored by the shah, causing Iran’s poverty rate to fall from 25% in the 1970s to 10% in 2014 (Fathollah-Nejad). The policies helped bring more clean drinking water and electricity to rural towns, and insurance policies - such as for unemployment and healthcare - also protected vulnerable citizens from falling into poverty. It expanded infrastructure from the cities to the countryside, lessening the rural-urban divide. Another important accomplishment of the new policies was the doubling in overall literacy percentage, especially among women, and causing female students to outnumber their male counterparts in universities for over a decade (Fathollah-Nejad). 

Despite the success in the Islamic Republic’s address of Iran’s large population of impoverished people, unemployment continued to be a pressing issue. This issue exists because although Iran does have many times the number of university graduates as it did before, there are simply not enough jobs to accommodate the greater number of university graduates, causing around 25-40% of Iran’s youth to be unemployed (Fathollah-Nejad). About 50% of Iran’s entire workforce also does not have stable employment, causing a majority of workers to still be at risk of impoverishment (Fathollah-Nejad). Similarly, though urbanization has increased greatly throughout Iran, it mostly increased the amount of slums. In fact, the total population of those living in slums has increased 17-fold (Khosravi). These issues are largely due to the fact that the Revolution essentially replaced one oppressive ruling power with another - the clergy instead of the shah - which did not change Iran’s social composition in general. This led to some scholars criticizing the Iranian Revolution and deeming it “passive”, seeing as Khomeini’s vow to close the gap between the extremely wealthy and extremely poor has not been fulfilled, and that “the leaders to those at the bottom of the social ladder” are in fact not all equal before the law.

Though Khomeini said directly in his speech that Iran was not to be a so-called “sham democracy”, that it was to be a true democratic society with emphasis on “popular consensus”, this has not been realized by the Islamic Republic. In fact, although Khomeini referred to his new government as a “democracy”, no opposing political party was allowed to be formed. This caused many to be unsatisfied with the Republic, especially young people in rural areas that see economic hardships firsthand. For example, when protests arose in rural areas in 2018, 90% of arrested protestors were under the age of 25 in the town Izeh (Khosravi). Every year, more Iranian youth move from rural towns to city slums, only to be exploited as cheap labor, and often get paid less than 20 USD for an entire day of work (Khosravi). On the other hand, though Khomeini vowed to lessen economic inequalities (and the Republic has somewhat succeeded), Iran continues to develop an elite consumerist culture in some of its largest cities. For example, in Tehran, the price per square meter of a building in one area of the city can be worth 3 years worth of wages of a worker from another area of the city. In an opinion article by The New York Times, one worker ironically addressed God, saying, “If these people [the rich elite Iranians] are your creatures, what am I then?”

Women as well as minorities (in terms of ethnicity, ideals, political standpoint, religion, etcetera) were supposed to have the same rights as all other Iranian citizens according to Khomeini’s philosophy. However, numerous cases of police brutality and discrimination have proved this wrong. In Khomeini’s “We Shall Confront the World with Our Ideology” speech, he loosely said that he would allow people the freedom of having different beliefs, so long as they do not “corrupt” the pure Islamic society and its people. If they did attempt to “corrupt”, however, they would face legal consequences. However, the Iranian police has been shown to repeatedly abuse their power in punishing and “weeding out” the “corruption” sown by “ungodly persons”. For example, Tehran’s Evin Prison became notorious after Nobel Prize winner and human rights activist Narges Mohammedi published a book, White Torture, on the Prison’s intelligence officers’ physical, mental, and sexual abuse of the imprisoned women. However, the Iranian government denied all such allegations and stated once again that the police were doing their job to stop the “disease” - referring to the women that protested against the head covering law - from spreading and keeping Iranian society “pure”. One of the main loopholes in Khomeini’s speech was his ambiguous treatment of “corruption”, which then in turn allowed government forces to abuse their power and deem anything or anyone against Khomeini and his ideals as “counterrevolutionary” and therefore corrupt. Besides women, Kurds, Turkmen, Sunnis, and left-wing revolutionaries were some among many other minorities that were targeted by Iran’s morality police and thrown into jail, put under house arrest, or at worst, executed. In fact, during the earlier years of the Islamic Republic (from 1981 to 1985), there were over 8,000 people executed for political reasons, and today, Iran continues to hold one of the world’s highest execution rates (Fathollah-Nejad). This has all further proven the Islamic Republic’s lack of adherence to Khomeini’s vision for all people, regardless of social class, to be equal before the law.

Iran continues to be in social and economic turmoil, due to the lack of freedom present in its new government. Though the Islamic Republic did improve the lives of many, it still contradicts much of Khomeini’s vision for not only a pure Iranian society, but also a peaceful one, and its institutions continue to abuse some of the powers it is given in its constitution. 
