---
layout: post
title: "Beauty as a Double-Edged Sword: “Red Clowns” and Society’s Depiction of Love"
---
Society’s glorification of being desired puts young girls in danger. In Sandra Cisneros’ vignette “Red Clowns” from The House on Mango Street, Esperanza goes to a carnival with her friend Sally, who has already learned what benign perceived as a woman — not a girl — yields, and has adapted to it, even embraced it at times. Esperanza, however, does not, and discovers first-hand the dangers of womanhood when Sally leaves her alone at the carnival, to go off with a boy. Given Esperanza’s transitional age, Cisneros utilizes spinning, dizzying imagery and blunt, short sentence structure in order to portray a woman’s beauty as a double-edged sword — though it can be weaponized, it can also render the user herself vulnerable. 

Dizzying images in “Red Clowns” capture Esperanza’s hysteria and desperation, as well as being a physical representation of how her views (and expectations) about being a woman, being beautiful and desirable, have been completely turned upside-down. Beginning with the tilt-a-whirl, an ironic symbol of childhood innocence. Cisneros continually uses images that would remind one of the fun and wonder of childhood in a different scenario, in harsh juxtaposition to the dark, ugly truth of the vignette. When Esperanza describes that “the colors begin to whirl. Sky tipped,” Cisneros is throwing the reader in the character’s shoes to evoke the powerful emotions of loss, confusion, and utterly terrifying helplessness. The distorted images of “The man that watched. The tilt-a-whirl. The red clowns laughing their thick-tongue laugh” work to taint all the things that might have once brought Esperanza (as a child) — as well as the reader themself — joy, and serves to paint an ominous picture of innocence lost.

By employing harshly short and repetitive syntax, Cisneros emphasizes the cruel reality of the situation Esperanza is in, while simultaneously creating a sense of desperation through her repeated pleas, which all go unanswered. “Sally Sally a hundred times,” Esperanza cries out, the repetition of her friend’s name adding to her hysteria and she is sexually assaulted. This line also further establishes Sally’s character flaws — that she, in her own desperation for male attention due to the precarious situation of her family, left her friend alone and essentially defenseless at a carnival, late at night. The unnamed boy’s reiteration of “I love you” and “Spanish girl” are an ironic punch to an already sickened gut, because to Esperanza, this is the farthest possible thing from love, as well as an unsuccessful escape from her own identity. She looked for male attention in the first place somewhat because she wished to be someone, something, that she wasn’t, but now, she is literally being referred to as “Spanish girl”, a gross simplification of her character that simultaneously demonstrates how she can never escape who she truly is. Realizing the truth of being beautiful sometimes, Esperanza turns towards the “books and magazines…storybooks and movies”, all of which she sees as lies now. These pairs of nouns describe common objects that most girls have been subject to since childhood, and fed “lies” about perfect, idyllic romances that seem to come hand in hand with beauty, though the truth is far from it.

Esperanza’s experience in “Red Clowns” is traumatizing and horrible in the sense that it is unforgivingly realistic, and tragically commonplace for young girls just getting a taste of womanhood. Because society is so geared towards describing and promoting love in conjunction to (and as an effect of ) beauty, young girls often throw themselves into being women (sometimes prematurely), expecting to be rewarded with love. “Red Clowns” by Sandra Cisneros serves as  a cautionary tale, not just about girls and carelessness, but about what will continue to ensue should society not change and continue to keep young women in the dark and therefore vulnerable.
