---
layout: post
title: "Psychological and Physical Freedom: “The Problem that has No Name” in America and Iran"
---
In 1963, Betty Friedan, a prominent and often controversial female journalist, published a book titled The Feminine Mystique. Friedan’s eponymous “feminine mystique” referred to the pervasive social construct of the stereotypically happy, self-sacrificing wife and mother. During Great Depression and World War II, the three decades prior, the presence of women in the workforce increased in order for families to make ends meet and to fill the vacancies left behind by men who went to war, and the first wave of feminism witnessed the passing of the 19th Amendment that granted women the right to vote. However, the subsequent 1950s were epitomized by a return to domesticism as Americans grasped at normalcy. The American woman once again became “wife, mother, love object, dishwasher, and general server of [her man’s] physical needs” (“Television and the Feminine Mystique”). Though ostensibly content, in reality many of these housewives felt isolated and dissatisfied despite possessing a good husband, dutiful children, and comfortable life. This feeling of dissatisfaction was previously called “housewife syndrome”, but Friedan termed it the “problem that has no name”, redefining it as a social rather than psychological issue. Betty Friedan’s “problem that has no name” resonates with the universal human desire for self-actualization and personal freedom in the context of women’s rights. While it manifested in America mainly as a struggle for women to gain equal rights, in authoritarian societies like Iran, the “problem” is not merely psychological discontent but the life-threatening suppression of bodily autonomy and violation of fundamental human rights by the state.

The second wave of feminism during the 1960s and 1970s was spurred by Betty Friedan’s idea of the “feminine mystique”, and was rooted in addressing the limitations imposed by a deeply patriarchal society. The Feminine Mystique had a massive impact on white middle-class women, some of which were inspired to leave bad marriages, seek education, or simply search for personal fulfillment. Others simply hoped for their daughters to lead happier, less restricted lives. By referencing Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, Friedan argued that women were trapped in a vicious cycle, repeatedly fulfilling lower-level needs whilst being unable to achieve higher levels of fulfillment, leading to feelings of dissatisfaction. The rise of television also aided the spread of the cliched housewife image—a misrepresentation as by the 1950s and 1960s, there were approximately 24 million women working outside the home (“Television and the Feminine Mystique”). Many women’s rights activists were concerned that when shows and movies on TV show a woman trying to get a man in any way possible, the audience of young girls watching is taught that “you aren’t or can’t be a person yourself”, that a woman’s value comes from the man she is attached to (ibid.). Friedan also called for more heroines in television because at the time, women were only presented in the media as weak, stupid, and insecure. She believed that a new generation of girls could only begin trusting that they have the capacity to be their own person (just as boys do) once the shows they grew up watching gave them examples of strong and independent women.

Beyond its initial focus on domestic limitations, the American women’s rights movement developed into an attempt to gain political and legal equality for women, aiming to dismantle systemic barriers. After the ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1920, the American women’s rights movement shifted its focus during the 1970s to securing equal treatment regardless of gender across all societal spheres. Issues like workplace harassment became public for the first time (and would resurface much later in the form of the #MeToo movement), and American women were able to overcome many societal obstacles to address issues that were once considered shameful private matters. With more women empowered to be politically active, this period of time saw diversified opinions and a recognition of female voices as a powerful voting coalition. Currently, the UN states that political systems are undermined and illegitimate when women are underrepresented, and a “critical mass” of women is needed in government to ensure gender equality (“Women and Politics”). It has also been argued that the representation of women will contribute to a more democratic system of government. However, this perspective has been criticized for overlooking the fact that the presence of women in politics does not correlate to a stronger feminist political platform, as not all women are feminists. This point is further exemplified by a prominent female attorney and conservative activist during the second wave of feminism, Phyllis Schlafly.

In the 1960s and 1970s, the goals of American women’s rights activists often encountered intense opposition from conservatives (both men and women), who invoked traditional values and exaggerated the pursuits of feminists to inspire fear in moderates. Phyllis Schlafly was one of many prominent right-wing activists opposing the women’s rights movement. She emphasized the importance of keeping women in their role at home, and that they would be “contaminated” if they operated outside of it (“The Right to Be a Woman”). “The Right to Be a Woman”, an article written by Schlafly in 1972, directly opposed the passing of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) by arguing that it would destroy marriage as an institution, lead to sexually integrated bathrooms and prisons, and add women into the military draft—even though none of these were actually included in any part of the ERA. In fact, the ERA’s main goal was simply to add the prohibition of discriminating on the basis of sex to the Constitution, so as to prevent loopholes in the future. Those who believed that women were elevated to a “cult of domesticity” feared the ERA wouldn’t have the power to protect women that chose to be homemakers, and might force women to work against their will (ibid.). By defining the idea of the nuclear family as the building block of society, especially when limited to a breadwinning father and a homemaking mother, anti-ERA activists warned that ratifying the ERA would uproot American society as the people knew it. They saw the ERA seemingly as a point of no return, and wanted women to remain in the private sphere of home and children while men carried on in the public sphere of politics and work.

Contemporary American women’s rights continue to center around systemic gender inequalities, which can be exemplified by the widespread #MeToo movement of the 2000s and 2010s. Even in the 1960s and 1970s, some conservatives agreed that women were and would continue to be exploited by men, especially in the workplace, but deviated from liberals in the sense that they didn’t see the ERA as a viable solution. The phrase “me too” was coined in 2006 by Tarana Burke, who began the #MeToo movement as a program for minors to speak out and address their personal experiences with sexual violence. Burke wanted #MeToo to be an outlet for survivors of sexual abuse, with goals of educating the community as well as providing resources and support to victims. The movement took off in 2017, when the New York Times published a report detailing Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein’s decades of sexual misconduct and his coverup attempts. The women interviewed in the article all had similar stories, detailing Weinstein’s persistent behavior and the power imbalance between themselves and Weinstein. Lauren O’Connor, a young executive at The Weinstein Co. and one of the first whistleblowers, said that “I am a 28 year old woman trying to make a living and a career. Harvey Weinstein is a 64 year old, world famous man and this is his company” (Kantor, Jodi, and Megan Twohey). Young actresses were even more vulnerable to Weinstein’s advances. Ashley Judd, a budding actress unaware of Weinstein’s “business meetings” tactics recalled thinking — “How do I get out of the room as fast as possible without alienating Harvey Weinstein?” (Kantor, Jodi and Megan Twohey). Despite their vulnerability, another young actress was the one to put #MeToo back in the spotlight, just ten days after the Weinstein exposé. On October 15, 2017, actress Alyssa Milano tweeted “If you've been sexually harassed or assaulted write ‘me too’ as a reply to this tweet” (Kantor, Jodi and Megan Twohey). #MeToo quickly went viral across a variety of social media platforms, as more and more women spoke out about their personal experiences. The #MeToo movement began focusing on dispelling the shame surrounding sexual misconduct issues, arguing that societal taboo is what causes many perpetrators to never experience the consequences of their actions. Issues like sexual harassment, assault, and rape are often seen as shameful and embarrassing, especially in the workplace, where individuals fear losing their job if they speak out. Harvey Weinstein was the first of a number of high-profile individuals who were exposed for abusing their power in 2017, which led to Time magazine naming its chosen Person of the Year as “the Silence Breakers”, referring to the countless people who spoke up about sexual misconduct. Social media played a huge role in the spread of the movement by eradicating feelings of isolation for victims of sexual violence, connecting people miles and even countries apart.

While the American #MeToo movement primarily aimed to change cultural norms and hold particular people accountable for their actions, Iran’s #MeToo movement confronted government-enforced taboos and highlighted how many sexual issues never came to light due to its perception as a private and not public problem. The #MeToo movement in Iran exposed the twisted nature of its criminal justice system, which often blamed victims in sexual misconduct cases involving high-profile characters. For example, Aydin Aghdashloo, an internationally acclaimed Iranian artist with ties to the powerful ruling class who was accused by 13 women of sexual misconduct over a 30-year span, was let off by the Iranian government scot-free (Fassihi). The accusers were mostly former students, one of whom was a minor. Many of them recalled Aghdashloo showing off, claiming that he was “invulnerable” to sexual offense allegations due to his connections to the government and powerful religious officials within Iran (Fassihi). Aghdashloo himself denied all wrongdoing, but many anonymous whistleblowers said his reputation in the art world was an “open secret”, causing Aghdashloo to quickly be dubbed the Harvey Weinstein of Iran (Fassihi). Though he did not face explicit punishments from the Iranian government, private institutions within and without Iran have canceled Aghdashloo’s exhibits and banned him from numerous art festivals (Fassihi, Farnaz, and Catherine Porter). The greatest shift that came from the spread of #MeToo to Iran was the willingness of victims to come forward and share their stories, a direct contradiction to the traditional values of Iranian and Islamic society, in which discussing sex openly is prohibited. In fact, the culture often blames women for any kind of sexual abuse they may experience. #MeToo’s prominence in Iran led to further worldwide debate and calls for reform to the Iranian government.

The Iranian women’s rights movement differs from the American as activists fought for their basic human rights and bodily autonomy (instead of psychological dissatisfaction and desire for a higher quality of life), confronting state-mandated oppression often at the risk of their own lives. The movement directly opposes an oppressive dress code, which has been ever-present in the lives of Iranian women since the Iranian Revolution in the 1970s, and is enforced by the Gasht-e Ershad (morality police), whose impact can be seen in the tragedy of a young girl’s death. Jina Mahsa Amini was a twenty-two year-old Iranian woman who was arrested on September 13, 2022 by the morality police for wearing a hijab “too loosely” to be “decent” (“Mahsa Amini Dies in Police Custody…”). She died in police custody, and according to a United Nations (UN) report from March 2024, there was physical trauma inflicted on her body in the time period while she was in custody—concrete evidence disproving the Iranian police’s claim that her death was an “unfortunate incident”, and that she was not physically harmed by the morality police in any way (ibid.). Her death sparked the Iranian women’s rights movement, which began starting from her funeral, when many women in attendance removed their hijabs in protest as they chanted “Jin, Jiyan, Azadî”, which means “Woman, Life, Freedom”. “Jin, Jiyan, Azadî” quickly became the movement’s rallying cry, as women purposefully removed their head coverings in front of police officers, cut their hair, and burned their hijabs. Prior to Amini’s death, the Iranian women’s rights movement had only sporadic, small-scale protests, and was not taken seriously by the government. Though the movement has never had explicitly political goals, hence their slogan “change without regime change”, they call for a liberation of Iranian women from archaic religious limitations such as the mandatory dress code, in which women must cover themselves entirely except the face and hands in public (Sajadi). Iranian women’s rights activists, such as 2023 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Narges Mohammadi, saw this dress code as oppressive to the modern woman. Mohammadi herself was incarcerated for “spreading anti-state propaganda”, like many other women’s rights activists in Iran who speak out at the risk of their own lives (Bubola). Locked up in Iran’s notorious Evin Prison, Mohammadi’s teenage children accepted the Nobel Peace Prize on her behalf and delivered a speech calling for the “globalization of peace and human rights” (Bubola). In the words of Suzane Nossel, the head of PEN America, a free speech group, “The government of Iran prefers the humiliating spectacle of the world honoring her [Narges Mohammadi] in absentia to the risk of allowing her to speak her mind” (Bubola). Even though imprisoned, Mohammadi continued orchestrating protests inside the prison, paralleling the response by countless women in Iran to Mahsa Amini’s death. Unlike many other governments, the Iranian government institutionalizes religion and has little tolerance for protests, shown by numerous violent reactions by the morality police to otherwise peaceful protests. Ayatollah Khomeini, the supreme leader of Iran, blamed social unrest on “the United States and the Zionist regime”, while President Ebrahim Raisi said Iran would not tolerate “acts of chaos” (“Mahsa Amini Dies in Police Custody…”). The UN report published in March 2024 investigating the Mahsa Amini protests concluded that the Iranian government had conducted “crimes against humanity” by using “unnecessary and disproportionate” lethal force against protestors, often including sexual assault upon those that were detained by the police (ibid.).

Though the respective contexts of the American and Iranian women’s rights movements dictate vastly different approaches and outcomes, the advancement of social media and shared concerns over sexual misconduct highlight their similarities.The American women’s rights movement peaked in the 1960s and 1970s, yet its effects and ideals continue to be seen today—not just within the US, but also in other countries such as Iran, which is continuing to struggle over women’s rights. Though the two movements are largely separated geographically and differ over their specific goals, they are connected by the same global struggle for women’s rights throughout the 20th and 21st centuries. The fact that the #MeToo movement was able to spread from its roots in America all the way to Iran and other countries not discussed here exemplifies how the advancement of technology and social media can help bring otherwise domestic struggles to a global stage, and give rise to a global struggle with global participation.

---
<br>
Works Cited

Bazafkan, Homa. "'Women, Life, Freedom' a new revolutionary era in Iran." Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and Cooperation

"Betty Friedan Publishes The Feminine Mystique : 1963." Global Events: Milestone Events Throughout History, edited by Jennifer Stock, vol. 6, Farmington Hills, MI, Gale, 2014. Gale in Context: U.S. History

“Iran: The Politics of Women’s Rights and Hypocrisy” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 21 Feb. 2023

Davenport, Walter. "Where Men Go Wrong About Women Voters." History Matters, George Mason University, 14 Sept. 1956

Fassihi, Farnaz, and Catherine Porter. "Famed Iranian Artist under #MeToo Cloud Faces Art World Repercussions." The New York Times, 1 Nov. 2020

Friedan, Betty. "TWENTY YEARS after THE FEMININE MYSTIQUE." The New York Times, 27 Feb. 1983

Hunter, Jean E. "A Daring New Concept: 'The Ladies' Home Journal' and Modern Feminism." NWSA Journal, fall 1990

An Iranian Human Rights Activist and Journalist Wins Nobel Peace Prize. 6 Oct. 2023. Gale in Context: U.S. History

Kantor, Jodi, and Megan Twohey. "Harvey Weinstein Paid Off Sexual Harassment Accusers for Decades." The New York Times

Kundu, Kimtee. "The ##MeToo Movement : Investigating the Lasting International Impacts." Harvard International Review, 31 Jan. 2024

Lamensch, Marie. "In Iran, Women Deploy Social Media in the Fight for Rights." Centre for International Governance Innovation, 16 Nov. 2022

"Mahsa Amini Dies in Police Custody after Being Arrested on September 13, 2022, for Violating Iran's Hijab Policy, Sparking Nationwide Protests." Historic World Events, Gale, 2024. Gale in Context: U.S. History

"'Me Too.' Global Movement." Global Fund for Women

"#MeToo Is at a Crossroads in America. around the World, It's Just Beginning." The Washington Post

Mohammadi, Narges. "The More They Lock Us Up, the Stronger We Become." The New York Times, 16 Sept. 2023

"The Right to Be a Woman." American Decades Primary Sources, edited by Cynthia Rose, vol. 8, Gale, 2004, pp. 301-06. Gale in Context: U.S. History

Sajadi, Hamid. "Iranian Women's Movement: Political Opportunities and New Forces." Journal of International Women's Studies, vol. 25, no. 2, Mar. 2023, p. COV7+. Gale in Context: U.S. History,

Tajali, Mona. "Iranian Feminist Resistance: Paving the Way to National and Global Change." Wilson Center, 14 Feb. 2024

"Television and the Feminine Mystique." American Decades Primary Sources, edited by Cynthia Rose, vol. 7, Gale, 2004, pp. 396-99. Gale in Context: U.S. History

"Women and Politics." International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, edited by William A. Darity, Jr., 2nd ed., vol. 9, Macmillan Reference USA, 2008, pp. 110-12. Gale in Context: U.S. History
