---
layout: post
title: "An American Paradox: Hopeful Pessimism or Cynical Optimism?"
subtitle: "A Synthesis Essay on Steinbeck's “What is Happening to America?” & Crevecoeur's “What is an American?”"
---
##### *{{ page.subtitle }}*
---
<br></br>
###### “In nothing are we so paradoxical as in our passionate belief in our own myths.” 
-- John Steinbeck
 
Unlike many folk legends, America at its beginning was not unoccupied but fruitful land for the taking; it did not welcome the first pilgrims with open arms. Americans, from the start, were a hungry people — both literally and figuratively — that were willing to go to nearly any lengths to make this land their land. In his essay “What is Happening to America?”, John Steinbeck characterizes the American people as “a restless, a dissatisfied, a searching people”, while he later contradicts himself by admitting that they have “reached the end of a road and have discovered no new path to take, no duty to carry out, no purpose to fulfill” (Steinbeck 5, 8). However, these two seemingly polar-opposite statements are logically connected. Americans have always had the capacity for self-contradiction; in fact, they epitomize it.  In common knowledge, Americans are the people who came to this land in search of a better life than the one they left behind, ready to fight tooth and nail for it. But Steinbeck points out a contemporary pattern, in which Americans have begun to sink into the soft, enticing pillows of easy plenty. His warning emerges from a place of concern for post-World War II American society. Published in 1966, more than twenty years after the War, “What is Happening to America?” reflects on widespread social issues characteristic of the swelling self-satisfaction of a victorious nation. By highlighting the complacency of the American people and contrasting it against the image of Americans as a hungry, restless species, Steinbeck proposes a paradox that the American embodies.   
American identity originates from paradox: a jumble of peoples with diverse religions, cultures, and races that came to form one nation. As Steinbeck states, “we built America, and the process made us Americans” (Steinbeck 5). It was restless spirit that drove American colonists to revolution and to founding a nation governed by its people. The perpetual dissatisfaction with the way things were became the firm refusal to be lorded over by the likes of kings and nobility, to be voicelessly subordinated to other’s interest. The ideals of self-sufficiency and equal opportunity became the pillars of American society.
 
However, as things become easier to obtain, complacency flourishes. In a world full of new technology that betters people’s lives, Steinbeck discerns its problems beneath the glittering veil and its foreboding promise of more. Plenty itself is not an evil; however, excess occurs when plenty is acquired with little effort. Steinbeck exemplifies excess through the image of children during Christmas, when they “tear open package after package, and then…say, ‘Is that all?’” (Steinbeck 8). Furthermore, he explicates how the child might destroy his new gifts simply because he “’didn’t have anything to do’” (Steinbeck 8). When the effort put into getting has become disproportionately small, it leads to a feeling of emptiness. To a people who want for very little and who get so easily, right and wrong seems trivial. Steinbeck identifies Americans’ desensitization to right and wrong as an encompassing problem.

No longer a restless, perpetually hungry people, a society ignoring the difference between right and wrong proves to be breeding ground for individualism; a society indulging in material abundance turns out to be complacent but not harmonious. Although extreme individualism manifests violence, violence in itself is still a flare of critical heat that reflects a dissatisfaction with the way things are. While most focus upon crime as a societal problem, Steinbeck argues that it is a burst of energy from young people with anger and restlessness coursing through their veins. He writes, “Wasted energy is only a little problem compared with the lack of it” (Steinbeck 8). Restlessness is embodied by the idealized outlaw, who single-handedly restores justice in the face of a powerful but morally wrong collective. This figure has long been a crucial part of American culture, originating from the narrative of conquering the wild West. He remains the hero at the forefront of the American imagination. Americans’ love of the individual hero is a juxtaposition against their inherent distrust of organized authority figures – especially, as Steinbeck points out, those who have been in office for “too long”.
On the other hand, how Steinbeck portrays violence can be used to critique what Crevecoeur depicts America as – a “melting pot” of diverse cultures and peoples. Crevecoeur, a revolutionary-era Frenchman, paints a flattering portrait of the individualistic, hardworking American man. He marvels at the multiculturality of American society. However, Steinbeck uncovers the harsh lines of the original sketch beneath the vivid colors of Crevecoeur’s painting. He reveals that this society is only harmonious due to the constant threat of violence hanging over their heads. Is a society truly peaceful if violence (or the possibility of it) must be used to keep it so? Is the normalization of violence a form of desensitization – an illness that Steinbeck said the American people were severely afflicted with – as well?

Steinbeck also criticizes how the means of getting is becoming easier and easier for the American people, although the process of sow-and-reap itself does not encourage complacency. The process in which “...they [Americans] receive ample rewards for their labours; these accumulated rewards procure them lands; those lands confer on them the title of freemen, and to that title every benefit is affixed which men can possibly require” as Crevecoeur described, is necessary for a self-sufficient society and beneficial for its constituents. But in the mid-twentieth-century, from Steinbeck’ s perspective, the process of sow-and-reap has been drastically distorted and spoiled, either by an overly facilitated sowing or merely too much reaped.  The reason why Crevecoeur places such importance on the action of rewarding labor is because he is comparing feudal-era Europe with post-revolutionary America. However, the America in Crevecoeur’s “What is an American?” –  the plentiful land of fair opportunity for all – differs vastly from the America portrayed in Steinbeck’s “What is Happening to America?”, the latter of which seems to be heading down a dead-end road. 

Nevertheless, in true American fashion, Steinbeck concludes his essay by returning to his original statement about the insatiable nature of the American people. He declares that “It is in the American negation of these symptoms of extinction [of a society] that my hope and confidence lie” (Steinbeck 8). Steinbeck himself exemplifies an American paradox by ending his essay on a promising note – that they will get through it simply because they are Americans. Steinbeck wrote “What is Happening to America?” as a wake-up call to the Americans falling complacent. But he did not intend to dissuade. He aimed to reinvigorate them with the ways in which they began – not as poor souls who arrived to a land of milk and honey, but a hodgepodge of searching people, who doggedly fought for their land, their passion, and their beliefs.

