---
layout: post
title: "The Invisible, the Injured, the Invaluable"
---
I have the dream again; of a golden eagle that descends from the blanket of stars, iron-tipped wings drawn back like a bullet. He pierces through the brittle ceiling, black talons searching for something soft. And he finds it, naked and white and fragile, hidden in my throat. His talons seize my vocal cords and rip them out. They unravel like a ball of red yarn.

I wake up with a metallic taste in the back of my throat. My mind drifts to the eagle and I pull it back. I get up slowly, mulling over the dream. I find my uncle in the next room so he will read the prayer book to me. A woman’s body must be protected. A woman’s voice is sacred. She must not be seen by strangers. She must not be heard by strangers. To be a woman is to live quietly. Bitter disappointment lodges in my chest when I begin to think that every day is the same. I wake up. I knock on Uncle’s door and I pray. I make breakfast. I wait for Uncle to eat. Then I eat. Then I begin preparing for the next meal. I go to the market occasionally, otherwise I remain at the house.

One day I find myself thinking about the book again. The book I am too afraid to think of at night. It is said that the men who take the girls away can hear your thoughts, especially the ones you shouldn’t be thinking — the ones they can see swimming like desperate minnows in your irises. So the book stays stashed underneath my mattress, until Uncle’s snores reach my ears. I open it by moonlight, though the book is in English and I can’t read it. There is nothing else for me to read anyway. To be a woman is to live quietly.

I clutch to the strings of my voice and will them not to ring when I step outside. The desert is a dim, monotonous range of browns and murky greens. The roads are empty, and my head bows under the weight of my veil. My feet shuffle along the dirt ground, following the instructions given to me. Twenty steps past the big weeping willow tree I begin to doubt. Perhaps Uncle heard the soft rustle as I left my bed. Perhaps they will find me, metal claws snatching a helpless rabbit from its shallow hiding spot. Forty steps past the weeping willow, I decide my fate will be worse than a rabbit’s if I am found. Another ten steps. I settle for the fact that death is just death; it is bound to come sooner or later. Just as I am about to turn around, I spot a house squatting among the bushes, half-hidden. I stop, mustering up the courage to knock. The door opens. Standing there is a girl with a purplish bruise on her cheekbone, and a stern-looking woman. Behind them is a taller man. My feet stumble backwards in hasty retreat, but before I can run, the woman pulls me into the house. 
 
In the slow morning, about ten girls gather in a windowless room, forming a circle and murmuring quietly. They all turn to me momentarily with guarded expressions, but quickly relax when they see the woman. She says her name is Mina, and that the man is her husband. He appears around the corner and apologizes for startling me. I feel unsteady. Hela, the girl with the bruise, leads me into the room.

Mina says her mother, an English teacher, taught her how to read. She had worked at the local girls’ university. It’s a wasteland now, she sighs, and all the teachers and students and books died along with it. We sit and listen to her reverently: a woman who can read and write, a woman who can understand the world beyond this desert. With a makeshift blackboard, chalk, and a stick, Mina starts to teach us the alphabet. The sun is just peeking out and girls are starting to file out the door when she calls me over. You need to stop being afraid of everything, Mina says. To let fear define who you are is to lose to them. I paused, contemplating my answer. I know. But how can I not fear?

The eagle returns to my dreams. A dark mass twists itself in a revolting way, like a thick length of hair sweeping along a floor. It lifts its head, and I realize “it” is not an it at all. I wake up with cold sweat beading on my forearms. The stench of fear hangs around me heavily, yet I still reach under my mattress for the blue book. My finger traces out the words under the moonlight. White, for the color of snow that blankets the houses. R…a…b, b, i…t? I turn the pages one by one, savoring each word and each letter I recognize. Now, when nightmares keep me awake, I have words by my side. 

The moon has just begun to set, a faint glow appearing at the horizon. I have already thrown off my covers and pad softly towards the door. The path to Mina’s house is familiar now. Buoyed by hope, my eyes cast toward a place that feels safe and warm. Home. What an unfamiliar word, even in my mother tongue. The sun is barely up, but I scratch the word out in the dirt as best as I can. It stares back at me like proof of a crime. I consider smudging it with my foot, but I leave it. I see home before I reach it. I knock on the door. No answer. I wait, willing the door to fly open the next second. Nothing. I push against it half-heartedly, and the door gives. I look down. A lock of dark hair lies on the floor, long and thick. I know whose hair that is. I know that hair belongs to a woman whose veil is never on. I steel myself and move toward the windowless room. Sunlight comes streaming in from the door, washing the brown walls golden. Laid on the ground are Mina and her husband, arms and legs entwined. They are lying in a pool of blood. Her hair is splayed out in a halo.

I scream but nothing comes out. A woman’s voice is sacred. I want to scramble back, to run back to where I came from and forget what I saw. But I am fixed to the ground, unmoving. I open my mouth and — A woman’s voice is sacred. A woman’s voice is sacred. The words drill into my head dully, and I finally know what it means that they can hear your thoughts. Tears run down my cheeks, and even that feels forbidden. Suddenly my nightmare returns: Mina’s stained hair and pain-stricken face. The walls seem tinted a sinister red. I barely register the creak of the door opening again. What happened? Hela asks. I shake my head soundlessly. Hela looks behind me and begins to wail like a wounded animal. Then sobs rack my own body as I step toward her, the unleashed sounds surprising me. The two of us burrow into Mina’s lifeless shape. Soon, all the girls are here. We gather around Mina, like we always do. Someone offers a prayer, but no one takes her up on it. Most of them leave quickly, fear flashing in their eyes. Everyone knows who the murderers are.

I find myself back at Uncle’s house. I am tethered to this place, even if I do not belong to it, and it to me. I crawl back to bed beneath paper-thin covers, my tears barely dry. I knock on Uncle’s door again, and ask him to read me the morning prayer. I drag myself to the kitchen and make breakfast. I wait, my hands folded in my lap like the dutiful girl I am. I watch Uncle eat. Then I force the food down my throat, and swallow. What was the hardest for me is now quite easy. My quick tongue was my one deficiency, but today I find comfort in muteness. I nod in reply to any requests made of me. Uncle seems pleased by this; he thinks I have finally become sensible. I wish he wasn’t right. I wish I never had the slightest spark. I wish I wouldn’t have to feel this pain. If everything goes back to the way it was in the beginning, everything will be alright.

I wake before dawn. I have to go to Mina’s. Then reality hits me square in the chest. It has been a month, but it feels like it happened just yesterday. I close my eyes, even though I know sleep won’t come. Breakfast ends up being made a few hours earlier than usual. Uncle takes a sip of the soup, but then he lifts his head, a look of disdain on his face. I lower my eyes instantly. Why is the soup cold? he asks. I’m sorry, Uncle, I say. I asked you a question, girl, he snarls, stepping closer. The curses I learned from Hela cross my mind, and I suppress a laugh under my breath. Are you laughing? asks Uncle. I shake my head, not trusting my voice. Are you laughing? he asks again, one hand grabbing me by the throat and the other darting out to strike me across the cheek. The stinging pain catches me off guard, and before I can help it, I glare at him. His face changes from shock to fury. He hits me again and again, until I crumple to the ground and curl myself into a protective ball. He starts kicking me, and I think I hear a bone break. I hate him. I hate him. I shout it from my mind if not with my voice.

The beating finally stops. I stay with my knees tucked to my chest, breathing hard. He comes back, only to tell me to go to the market. Then he leaves. I get up, and try not to scream when I take a step forward. I limp to the market, dragging my injured foot. Behind the fruit stall wanders a little girl no older than seven. Her eyes are alarmed and wide as saucers — she is not lost, she is fleeing. Suddenly a man appears, scanning the market furiously. I turn, taking the girl’s hand and pulling her toward a stack of crates. 

We are taking the road to Mina’s house. The little girl sniffles behind me and tries her best to keep up. I look ahead, but the house doesn’t peek out from the brush. Only a faint smell of ash lingers in the air. I stop and kneel in front of the girl. I take the veil off my face. The girl’s eyes reflect mine, round and watery, filled with fear and desperation. These feelings once ran familiar in my veins. Her tiny hands are cold, so I take them in mine. I bring our hands close to my chest and ask, Would you like me to read you a book? 
